(new core) Record-valued ValueType, with canonical-bytes enforcement (#1251)
garden-co/jazz: homepage/homepage/app/(docs)/docs/[framework]/[...slug]/upgrade/0-10-0.mdx

import { ContentByFramework, CodeGroup } from '@/components/forMdx'

export const metadata = { title: "Jazz 0.10.0 is out!" };

# Jazz 0.10.0 is out!

<h2 className="not-prose text-sm text-stone-600 dark:text-stone-400 mb-5 pb-2 border-b">
  11 February 2025
</h2>

<div>

>   For Jazz 0.10.0 we have been focusing on enhancing authentication to make it optional and more flexible.

Author: ```suggestion
  For Jazz 0.10.0 we have been focusing on enhancing authentication to make it optional, more flexible and easier to use.
```

>   Now your users can play around with your app, even in local-only mode, before signing up.

Author: ```suggestion
  The default is now anonymous auth, which means that you can build the functionality of your app first and figure out auth later. For users this means that they can start using your app right away on one device -- and once you integrate an auth method, users can sign up and their anonymous accounts are transparently upgraded to authenticated accounts that work across devices.
```

  - [Local-only mode](/docs/upgrade/0-10-0#local-only-mode): Users can now explore your app in local-only mode before signing up.
  - [Improvements on the loading APIs](/docs/upgrade/0-10-0#improved-loading-api); `ensureLoaded` now always returns a value and `useCoState` now returns `null` if the value is not found.
  - [Jazz Workers on native WebSockets](/docs/upgrade/0-10-0#native-websocket-for-jazz-workers): Improves compatibility with a wider set of Javascript runtimes.
  - Support for Node 14 dropped on cojson.
  - Bugfix: `Group.removeMember` now returns a promise.
</div>

  <h3 id="new-authentication-flow">New authentication flow</h3>
  <div>
    Up until now authentication has been the first part to figure out when building a Jazz app, and this was a stumbling block for many.

    Now it is no longer required and setting up a Jazz app is as easy as writing this:
<CodeGroup>
{/* prettier-ignore */}
```tsx
<JazzProvider
    auth={authMethod} // removed  // *bin*
    peer="wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=you@example.com"  // moved into sync // *bin*
    sync={{ peer: "wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=you@example.com" }}  // *add*
>
    <App />
</JazzProvider>
```
</CodeGroup>

> New users are initially authenticated as "anonymous" and you can sign them up with one of the Jazz providers.

Author: ```suggestion
New users are initially authenticated as "anonymous" and you can sign them up later with the hooks/providers of your chosen auth method.
```

  const name = formData.get('name') as string;

  if (!name) {
    error = 'Name is required';
    return;
  }
  e.preventDefault();
  error = undefined;
  auth.current.signUp(name).catch((e) => {
    error = e.message;
  });
}

function logIn() {
  error = undefined;
  auth.current.logIn().catch((e) => {
    error = e.message;
  });
}
```
</CodeGroup>
</ContentByFramework>
<ContentByFramework framework="vue">
<CodeGroup>
{/* prettier-ignore */}
```tsx
import { usePasskeyAuth } from 'jazz-vue';
import { ref } from 'vue';

const auth = usePasskeyAuth({ appName: "My super-cool web app" });
const error = ref<string | undefined>(undefined);

function signUp(e: Event) {
  const formData = new FormData(e.currentTarget as HTMLFormElement);
  const name = formData.get('name') as string;

  if (!name) {
    error.value = 'Name is required';
    return;
  }
  e.preventDefault();
  error.value = undefined;
  auth.value.signUp(name).catch((e) => {
    error.value = e.message;
  });
}

function logIn(e: Event) {
  error.value = undefined;
  e.preventDefault();
  auth.value.logIn().catch((e) => {
    error.value = e.message;
  });
}
```
</CodeGroup>
</ContentByFramework>

> When a user signs up with one of the providers we register the current anonymous account into it.

Author: ```suggestion
When a user signs up with one of the auth methods we upgrade the current anonymous account to an authenticated account by storing the account's secret keys in the auth method.
```

  const { logOut } = useAccount();
  const [open, setOpen] = useState(false);

  if (isAuthenticated) {
    return (
      <Button 
        variant="outline" 
        onClick={logOut}
      >
        Sign out
      </Button>
    );
  }

  return (
    <>
      <Button onClick={() => setOpen(true)}>
        Sign up
      </Button>
      <AuthModal open={open} onOpenChange={setOpen} />
    </>
  );
}
```
</CodeGroup>
</ContentByFramework>
<ContentByFramework framework={["react-native"]}>
To check if the user has registered you can use the new `useIsAuthenticated` hook:
<CodeGroup>
{/* prettier-ignore */}
```tsx
export function AuthButton() {
  const isAuthenticated = useIsAuthenticated();
  const { logOut } = useAccount();
  const [open, setOpen] = useState(false);

  if (isAuthenticated) {
    return (
      <Button 
        variant="outline" 
        onPress={logOut}
      >
        Sign out
      </Button>
    );
  }

  return (
    <>
      <Button onPress={() => setOpen(true)}>
        Sign up
      </Button>
      <AuthModal open={open} onOpenChange={setOpen} />
    </>
  );
}
```
</CodeGroup>
</ContentByFramework>

<ContentByFramework framework={["react"]}>

> If you do want to require your users to register before using your app, you can do it by just moving the auth code inside the `JazzProvider` component like this:

Author: ```suggestion
If you do want to require your users to register before using your app, you can do it by moving the auth code outside of your app and conditionally rendering your app as a child -- or apply this pattern for specific parts of the app you'd like to gate behind authentication.

Our provided "Basic UIs" for the different auth methods render their children conditionally by default, so you can either nest them in your app without children, or nest your app or gated parts of your app inside *them*, depending on the desired behavior.
```

We should probably also mention this in the proper docs.

<CodeGroup>
{/* prettier-ignore */}
```tsx
import { JazzProvider, PasskeyAuthBasicUI } from "jazz-react";

ReactDOM.createRoot(document.getElementById("root")!).render(
    <JazzProvider
      sync={{ peer: "wss://cloud.jazz.tools/?key=you@example.com" }}
    >
      <PasskeyAuthBasicUI appName="My super-cool web app">
        <App />
      </PasskeyAuthBasicUI>
    </JazzProvider>
);
```
</CodeGroup>
</ContentByFramework>
For the changes related to the specific auth providers see the updated [authentication docs](/docs/authentication/overview).
  </div>

<h3 id="local-only-mode">Local-only mode</h3>
<div>

> A great way to get your users to try your app for free is to make it local-only for anonymous users.

Author: ```suggestion
If you are ok with data not being persisted on the sync server for anonymous users, you can now set your app to local-only depending on the user's authentication state.
```

Not something we want to encourage very enthusiastically :D

> With `sync.when` set to `"signedUp"` the app will work in local mode when the user is anonymous and unlock the multiplayer features when they sign up:

Author: ```suggestion
With `sync.when` set to `"signedUp"` the app will work in local-only mode when the user is anonymous and unlock the multiplayer/multi-device features and cloud persistence when they sign up:
```
